# Gizzard: a library for creating distributed datastores

Check out [Using gizzard](http://github.com/twitter/gizzard/blob/master/doc/using.md)
for details on requirements, how to build gizzard, and a demo app.

Also check out [the gizzard mailing list](http://groups.google.com/group/gizzard).

## An introduction to sharding

Many modern web sites need fast access to an amount of information so large
that it cannot be efficiently stored on a single computer. A good way to deal
with this problem is to “shard” that information; that is, store it across
multiple computers instead of on just one.

Sharding strategies often involve two techniques: partitioning and
replication. With *partitioning*, the data is divided into small chunks and
stored across many computers. Each of these chunks is small enough that the
computer that stores it can efficiently manipulate and query the data. With
the other technique of *replication*, multiple copies of the data are stored
across several machines. Since each copy runs on its own machine and can
respond to queries, the system can efficiently respond to tons of queries for
the same data by adding more copies. Replication also makes the system
resilient to failure because if any one copy is broken or corrupt, the system
can use another copy for the same task.

The problem is: sharding is difficult. Determining smart partitioning schemes
for particular kinds of data requires a lot of thought. And even more
difficult is ensuring that all of the copies of the data are *consistent*
despite unreliable communication and occasional computer failures. Recently, a
lot of open-source distributed databases have emerged to help solve this
problem. Unfortunately, as of the time of writing, most of the available
open-source projects are either too immature or too limited to deal with the
variety of problems that exist on the web. These new databases are hugely
promising but for now it is sometimes more practical to build a custom
solution.

## What is a sharding framework?

Twitter has built several custom distributed data-stores. Many of these
solutions have a lot in common, prompting us to extract the commonalities so
that they would be more easily maintainable and reusable. Thus, we have
extracted Gizzard, a Scala framework that makes it easy to create custom
fault-tolerant, distributed databases.

Gizzard is a *framework* in that it offers a basic template for solving a
certain class of problem. This template is not perfect for everyone’s needs
but is useful for a wide variety of data storage problems. At a high level,
Gizzard is a middleware networking service that manages partitioning data
across arbitrary backend datastores (e.g., SQL databases, Lucene, etc.). The
partitioning rules are stored in a forwarding table that maps key ranges to
partitions. Each partition manages its own replication through a declarative
replication tree. Gizzard supports “migrations” (for example, elastically
adding machines to the cluster) and gracefully handles failures. The system is
made *eventually consistent* by requiring that all write-operations are
idempotent *and* commutative and as operations fail (because of, e.g., a network
partition) they are retried at a later time.

A very simple sample use of Gizzard is [Rowz](http://github.com/twitter/Rowz),
a distributed key-value store. To get up-and-running with Gizzard quickly,
clone Rowz and start customizing!

But first, let’s examine how Gizzard works in more detail.

## How does it work?

### Gizzard is middleware

![diagram](http://github.com/twitter/gizzard/raw/master/doc/middleware.png?raw=true)

Gizzard operates as a *middleware* networking service. It sits “in the middle”
between clients (typically, web front-ends like PHP and Ruby on Rails
applications) and the many partitions and replicas of data. Sitting in the
middle, all data querying and manipulation flow through Gizzard. Gizzard
instances are stateless so run as many gizzards as are necessary to sustain
throughput or manage TCP connection limits. Gizzard, in part because it is
runs on the JVM, is quite efficient. One of Twitter’s Gizzard applications
(FlockDB, our distributed graph database) can serve 10,000 queries per second
per commodity machine. But your mileage may vary.

### Gizzard supports any datastorage backend

Gizzard is designed to replicate data across any network-available data
storage service. This could be a relational database, Lucene, Redis, or
anything you can imagine. As a general rule, Gizzard requires that all write
operations be idempotent *and* commutative (see the section on Fault Tolerance
and Migrations), so this places some constraints on how you may use the
back-end store. In particular, Gizzard does not guarantee that write
operations are applied in order. It is therefore imperative that the system is
designed to reach a consistent state regardless of the order in which writes
are applied.

### Gizzard handles partitioning through a forwarding table

Gizzard handles partitioning (i.e., dividing exclusive ranges of data across
many hosts) by mappings *ranges* of data to particular shards. These mappings
are stored in a forwarding table that specifies lower-bound of a numerical
range and what shard that data in that range belongs to.

![forwarding table](http://github.com/twitter/gizzard/raw/master/doc/forwarding_table.png)

To be precise, you provide Gizzard a hash function that, given a key for your
data (and this key can be application specific), produces a number that
belongs to one of the ranges in the forwarding table. These functions are
programmable so you can optimize for locality or balance depending on your
needs.

This range-based approach differs from the "consistent hashing" technique used
in many other distributed data-stores. This allows for heterogeneously sized
partitions so that you easily manage *hotspots*, segments of data that are
extremely popular. In fact, Gizzard does allows you to implement completely
custom forwarding strategies like consistent hashing, but this isn't the
recommended approach. For some more detail on partitioning schemes, [read
wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database)):

### Gizzard handles replication through a replication tree

Each shard referenced in the forwarding table can be either a physical shard
or a logical shard. A physical shard is a reference to a particular data
storage back-end, such as a SQL database. In contrast, A *logical shard* is
just a tree of other shards, where each *branch* in the tree represents some
logical transformation on the data, and each *node* is a data-storage
back-end. These logical transformations at the branches are usually rules
about how to propagate read and write operations to the children of that
branch. For example, here is a two-level replication tree. Note that this
represents just ONE partition (as referenced in the forwarding table):

![Alt text](http://github.com/twitter/gizzard/raw/master/doc/replication_tree.png)

The “Replicate” branches in the figure are simple strategies to repeat write
operations to all children and to balance reads across the children according
to health and a weighting function. You can create custom branching/logical
shards for your particular data storage needs, such as to add additional
transaction/coordination primitives or quorum strategies. But Gizzard ships
with a few standard strategies of broad utility such as Replicating,
Write-Only, Read-Only, and Blocked (allowing neither reads nor writes). The
utility of some of the more obscure shard types is discussed in the section on
`Migrations`.

The exact nature of the replication topologies can vary per partition. This
means you can have a higher replication level for a “hotter” partition and a
lower replication level for a “cooler” one. This makes the system highly
configurable. For instance, you can specify that the back-ends mirror one
another in a primary-secondary-tertiary-etc. configuration for simplicity.
Alternatively, for better fault tolerance (but higher complexity) you can
“stripe” partitions across machines so that no machine is a mirror of any
other.

### Gizzard is fault-tolerant

Fault-tolerance is one of the biggest concerns of distributed systems. Because
such systems involve many computers, there is some likelihood that one (or
many) are malfunctioning at any moment. Gizzard is designed to avoid any
single points of failure. If a certain replica in a partition has crashed,
Gizzard routes requests to the remaining healthy replicas, bearing in mind the
weighting function. If all replicas of in a partition are unavailable, Gizzard
will be unable to serve read requests to that shard, but all other shards will
be unaffected. Writes to an unavailable shard are buffered until the shard
again becomes available.

In fact, if any number of replicas in a shard are unavailable, Gizzard will
try to write to all healthy replicas as quickly as possible and buffer the
writes to the unavailable shard, to try again later when the unhealthy shard
returns to life. The basic strategy is that all writes are materialized to a
durable, transactional journal. Writes are then performed asynchronously (but
with manageably low latency) to all replicas in a shard. If a shard is
unavailable, the write operation goes into an error queue and is retried
later.

In order to achieve “eventual consistency”, this “retry later” strategy
requires that your write operations are idempotent *and* commutative. This is
because a retry later strategy can apply operations out-of-order (as, for
instance, when newer jobs are applied before older failed jobs are retried).
In most cases this is an easy requirement. A demonstration of commutative,
idempotent writes is given in the Gizzard demo app,
[Rowz](http://github.com/twitter/Rowz).

### Winged migrations

It’s sometimes convenient to copy or move data from shards from one computer
to another. You might do this to balance load across more or fewer machines,
or to deal with hardware failures. It’s interesting to explain some aspect of
how migrations work just to illustrate some of the more obscure logical shard
types. When migrating from `Datastore A` to `Datastore A'`, a Replicating
shard is set up between them but a WriteOnly shard is placed in front of
`Datastore A'`. Then data is copied from the old shard to the new shard. The
WriteOnly shard ensures that while the new Shard is bootstrapping, no data is
read from it (because it has an incomplete picture of the corpus).

![Alt text](http://github.com/twitter/gizzard/raw/master/doc/migration.png)

Because writes will happen out of order (new writes occur before older ones
and some writes may happen twice), all writes must be idempotent and
commutative to ensure data consistency.

### How does Gizzard handle write conflicts?

Write conflicts are when two manipulations to the same record try to change
the record in differing ways. Because Gizzard does not guarantee that
operations will apply in order, it is important to think about write conflicts
when modeling your data. As described elsewhere, write operations must be both
idempotent and commutative in order to avoid conflicts. This is actually an
*easy* requirement in many cases, way easier than trying to guarantee ordered
delivery of messages with bounded latency and high availability. As mentioned
above, Rowz illustrates a technique of using time-stamps to only apply
operations that are "newer". More documentation on this will be forthcoming.

## Contributors

* Robey Pointer
* Nick Kallen
* Ed Ceaser
* John Kalucki
* Matt Freels
* Kyle Maxwell
